# Tailwind

## Why

- Rigid classes allow you to create a consistent look and feel for your project, without manually styling each element.
- We can apply css class styles with Tailwind on specific states, like hover, focus, etc compared to normal inline styles.

## Installation

[All installation methods](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/installation)

### Using Tailwind as a PostCSS Plugin

Tailwind as a PostCSS plugin is the recommended way to use Tailwind in production. It allows you to use Tailwind's features like purging unused styles, which can significantly reduce the size of your CSS file.

PostCSS is a tool (pipeline) that transforms CSS with JavaScript plugins. <ins>It acts as a parser and a framework for running transformations, but it doesn't perform those transformations itself.</ins> It allows you to use modern CSS features and tools, such as autoprefixing, nesting, and variables. It acts like a pipeline for your CSS, taking your raw CSS code and running it through a series of plugins that modify and enhance it. ==When installing Tailwind as a PostCSS plugin, you are essentially adding a new plugin (tailwindcss) to your PostCSS pipeline==

Some of these plugins include:

- Adding vendor prefixes (Autoprefixer)
- Minifying CSS (CSSnano)
- Allowing future CSS syntax (postcss-preset-env)
- Linting CSS (Stylelint)
- Generating Tailwind CSS utility classes (@tailwindcss/postcss)

The order in which your PostCSS plugins operator is listed in the PostCSS configuration file `postcss.config.js` which determines the order in which they are applied.

### Using Tailwind as a Vite Plugin

Vite is a modern build tool that provides a fast development experience. It can be used to build and serve your Tailwind CSS project. In Tailwind CSS v4, you can use the `@tailwindcss/vite` plugin to integrate Tailwind CSS with Vite. This plugin allows you to use Tailwind CSS in your Vite project without needing to go through a separate PostCSS pipeline.

### Using Tailwind from CLI

You can also use Tailwind CSS from the command line interface (CLI) without needing to set up a build tool or PostCSS. This is useful for quick prototyping or small projects where you don't need the full power of Tailwind CSS.

Under the hood, CLI will point to your source CSS file, process it with Tailwind CSS using PostCSS, and output the final CSS file. This is a simple way to get started with Tailwind CSS without needing to set up a build tool or PostCSS. The CLI will act like a self-contained compiler while PostCSS is used to process the CSS still. CLI handles it for you under the hood, so you don't have to worry about it.

You may not use other plugins with the CLI method, as it is a standalone tool that only processes Tailwind CSS. It is not meant to be used in production, as it does not support features like purging unused styles or minifying CSS.

### Importing Tailwind CSS

To use Tailwind CSS in your project, you need to import it into your main CSS file. This is typically done by creating a `tailwind.css` file and adding the following lines:

In v4, the output.css file is generated by the CLI or build tool, and it will contain Tailwind CSS styles along with any custom styles you have defined. ==Tailwind will scan source files for classes and generate the final CSS file with only the classes that are used in your project.==

`@import "tailwindcss";` will reset all the default styles of the browser, and will also import all the tailwind classes (except utility, only added later when scanning source files)

`@source {file}` will import the source file where you have defined your custom styles, such as colors, fonts, and other design tokens.

`@source {file}` tells Tailwind CSS where to track your custom styles. This is useful for purging unused styles in production, as it allows Tailwind CSS to know which styles are being used in your project. If the custom styles match the classes known to Tailwind CSS, they will be included in the final CSS file (`output.css`)

`@layer {base|components|utilities}` is used to define the different layers of your CSS. The `base` layer is for global styles, the `components` layer is for reusable components, and the `utilities` layer is for utility classes. This allows you to organize your CSS and keep it maintainable. This is by default included in the `tailwind.css` file, but you can customize it to fit your project's needs.

`base` usually applies styles to html elements, such as `body`, `h1`, `p`, etc. It is used to set the default styles for your project.

`components` is used to define reusable components, such as buttons, cards, and forms. It is used to create a consistent look and feel for your project. Generally not recommended to use this layer, as utilities takes care of most of the styling needs.

`utilities` is used to define utility classes, such as `text-center`, `bg-red-500`, and `p-4`. It is used to apply styles to specific elements without having to create a separate class for each style.

The order of the layers is important, as it determines the ==specificity of the styles==. The `base` layer has the lowest specificity, followed by the `components` layer, and finally the `utilities` layer has the highest specificity. This means that styles defined in the `utilities` layer will override styles defined in the `base` and `components` layers.

### Utility Classes

### Colors

`-red` - define red colors  
`-orange` - define orange colors  
`-amber` - define amber colors  
`-yellow` - define yellow colors  
`-lime` - define lime colors  
`-green` - define green colors  
`-emerald` - define emerald colors  
`-teal` - define teal colors  
`-cyan` - define cyan colors  
`-sky` - define sky colors  
`-blue` - define blue colors  
`-indigo` - define indigo colors  
`-violet` - define violet colors  
`-purple` - define purple colors  
`-fuchsia` - define fuchsia colors  
`-pink` - define pink colors  
`-rose` - define rose colors  
`-slate` - define slate colors  
`-gray` - define gray colors  
`-zinc` - define zinc colors  
`-neutral` - define neutral colors  
`-stone` - define stone colors

- `-{50|100|200|300|400|500|600|700|800|900}` - define shades of the color, where 50 is the lightest and 900 is the darkest
  `-inherit` - defines the color from the parent element
  `-transparent` - defines a transparent color  
  `-current` - defines a current color  
  `-{custom property}` - define a custom variable property for the color (e.g. `color-custom('my-color')`)  
  `-{value}` - define a color, where value is a hex code, rgb/rgba value, or hsl/hsla value (e.g. `color-#ff0000` or `color-rgb(255, 0, 0)`)

## Layout

### Aspect Ratio

Utilities for controlling the aspect ratio of an element.

| Class                        | Styles                                            |
| ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------- |
| `aspect-<ratio>`             | aspect-ratio: &lt;ratio&gt;;                      |
| `aspect-square`              | aspect-ratio: 1 / 1;                              |
| `aspect-video`               | aspect-ratio: var(--aspect-ratio-video); `16 / 9` |
| `aspect-auto`                | aspect-ratio: auto;                               |
| `aspect-(<custom-property>)` | aspect-ratio: var(&lt;custom-property&gt;);       |
| `aspect-[<value>]`           | aspect-ratio: &lt;value&gt;;                      |

### Columns

Utilities for controlling the number of columns within an element.

| Class                         | Styles                                          |
| ----------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------- |
| `columns-<number>`            | columns: &lt;number of columns&gt;;             |
| `columns-3xs`                 | columns: var(--container-3xs); `16rem (256px)`  |
| `columns-2xs`                 | columns: var(--container-2xs); `18rem (288px)`  |
| `columns-xs`                  | columns: var(--container-xs); `20rem (320px)`   |
| `columns-sm`                  | columns: var(--container-sm); `24rem (384px)`   |
| `columns-md`                  | columns: var(--container-md); `28rem (448px)`   |
| `columns-lg`                  | columns: var(--container-lg); `32rem (512px)`   |
| `columns-xl`                  | columns: var(--container-xl); `36rem (576px)`   |
| `columns-2xl`                 | columns: var(--container-2xl); `42rem (672px)`  |
| `columns-3xl`                 | columns: var(--container-3xl); `48rem (768px)`  |
| `columns-4xl`                 | columns: var(--container-4xl); `56rem (896px)`  |
| `columns-5xl`                 | columns: var(--container-5xl); `64rem (1024px)` |
| `columns-6xl`                 | columns: var(--container-6xl); `72rem (1152px)` |
| `columns-7xl`                 | columns: var(--container-7xl); `80rem (1280px)` |
| `columns-auto`                | columns: auto;                                  |
| `columns-(<custom-property>)` | columns: var(<custom-property>);                |
| `columns-[<value>]`           | columns: &lt;value&gt;;                         |

### break-after

Utilities for controlling how a column or page should break after an element.

`-` - define negative values for properties  
`inset` - define all the inset properties (top, right, bottom, left) in one class  
`inset-x` - define the horizontal inset properties (left and right) in one class  
`inset-y` - define the vertical inset properties (top and bottom) in one class  
`top` - define the top inset property in one class  
`right` - define the right inset property in one class  
`bottom` - define the bottom inset property in one class  
`left` - define the left inset property in one class

- `-px` - define all 1px properties
- `-{num}` - each number is a multiple of 4px, represented a grid system
- `-{fraction/4}` - defines percentage values
- `-full` - defines 100% value

### Background

`bg` - define background properties

1. Background Image

   - `-{value}` - define a background image, where value is a URL or a custom property (e.g. `bg-image-url('path/to/image.jpg')`)
   - `-{custom property}` - define a custom variable property for the background image (e.g. `bg-image-custom('my-image')`)
   - `-none` - no background image
   - `-linear` - defines a linear gradient background image
   - `-radial` - defines a radial gradient background image
   - `-gradient` - defines a gradient background image, where the gradient can be linear or radial

1. Background Size

   - `-auto` - background image will be displayed at its original size
   - `-cover` - background image will cover the entire element, cropping if necessary
   - `-contain` - background image will contain the entire element, cropping if necessary
   - `-size-{custom properties}` - define a custom size for the background image
   - `-size-{value}` - define a size for the background image, where value is a multiple of 4px (e.g. `bg-size-16` will set the background image size to 64px)

1. Background Attachment

   - `-fixed` - defines a fixed background image
   - `-local` - defines a local background image
   - `-scroll` - defines a scrollable background image

1. Background Clip

   - `-clip-border` - background extends to the border of the element
   - `-clip-padding` - background extends to the padding of the element
   - `-clip-content` - background extends to the content of the element
   - `-clip-text` - background extends to the text of the element

1. Background Color

   - `-inherit` - defines the background color from the parent element
   - `-transparent` - defines a transparent background
   - `-current` - defines a current color background
   - `-{color}-{shade}` - defines a background color, where color is one of the colors defined above and shade is one of the shades defined above
   - `-{custom property}` - define a custom variable property for the background color (e.g. `bg-color-custom('my-color')`)
   - `-{value}` - define a color for the background, where value is a hex code, rgb/rgba value, or hsl/hsla value (e.g. `bg-color-#ff0000` or `bg-color-rgb(255, 0, 0)`)

1. Background Repeat

   - `-repeat` - defines a repeated background image
   - `-no-repeat` - defines a non-repeated background image
   - `-repeat-x` - defines a repeated background image in the x direction
   - `-repeat-y` - defines a repeated background image in the y direction
   - `-repeat-round` - defines a repeated background image without clipping, stretching to fill the space
   - `-repeat-space` - defines a repeated background image the edges first, then the rest of the image is spaced evenly (can leave gaps or white space between images)

1. Background Position

   - `-top-left` - defines the background position at the top left corner of the element
   - `-top` - defines the background position at the top center of the element
   - `-top-right` - defines the background position at the top right corner of the element
   - `-left` - defines the background position at the left center of the element
   - `-center` - defines the background position at the center of the element
   - `-right` - defines the background position at the right center of the element
   - `-bottom-left` - defines the background position at the bottom left corner of the element
   - `-bottom` - defines the background position at the bottom center of the element
   - `-bottom-right` - defines the background position at the bottom right corner of the element
   - `-position-{custom properties}` - define a custom variable property for the background image
   - `-position-{value}` - define a position for the background image, where value is a multiple of 4px (e.g. `bg-position-16` will set the background image position to 64px)

1. Background Origin
   - `-origin-border` - background origin is the border of the element
   - `-origin-padding` - background origin is the padding of the element
   - `-origin-content` - background origin is the content of the element

## Box-Shadow

| Class                            | Style                                                                                                   |
| -------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| shadow-2xs                       | box-shadow: var(--shadow-2xs); /_ 0 1px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.05) _/                                            |
| shadow-xs                        | box-shadow: var(--shadow-xs); /_ 0 1px 2px 0 rgb(0 0 0 / 0.05) _/                                       |
| shadow-sm                        | box-shadow: var(--shadow-sm); /_ 0 1px 3px 0 rgb(0 0 0 / 0.1), 0 1px 2px -1px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.1) _/       |
| shadow-md                        | box-shadow: var(--shadow-md); /_ 0 4px 6px -1px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.1), 0 2px 4px -2px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.1) _/    |
| shadow-lg                        | box-shadow: var(--shadow-lg); /_ 0 10px 15px -3px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.1), 0 4px 6px -4px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.1) _/  |
| shadow-xl                        | box-shadow: var(--shadow-xl); /_ 0 20px 25px -5px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.1), 0 8px 10px -6px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.1) _/ |
| shadow-2xl                       | box-shadow: var(--shadow-2xl); /_ 0 25px 50px -12px rgb(0 0 0 / 0.25) _/                                |
| shadow-none                      | box-shadow: 0 0 #0000;                                                                                  |
| shadow-(<custom-property>)       | box-shadow: var(<custom-property>);                                                                     |
| shadow-(color:<custom-property>) | --tw-shadow-color: var(<custom-property>);                                                              |

## Flexbox

justify-content
Utilities for controlling how flex and grid items are positioned along a container's main axis.

| Class | Styles |
| --- | --- |
| justify-start | justify-content: flex-start; |
| justify-end | justify-content: flex-end; |
| justify-end-safe | justify-content: safe flex-end; |
| justify-center | justify-content: center; |
| justify-center-safe | justify-content: safe center; |
| justify-between | justify-content: space-between; |
| justify-around | justify-content: space-around; |
| justify-evenly | justify-content: space-evenly; |
| justify-stretch | justify-content: stretch; |
| justify-baseline | justify-content: baseline; |
| justify-normal | justify-content: normal; |

place-self
Utilities for controlling how an individual item is justified and aligned at the same time.

| Class | Styles |
| --- | --- |
| place-self-auto | place-self: auto; |
| place-self-start | place-self: start; |
| place-self-end | place-self: end; |
| place-self-end-safe | place-self: safe end; |
| place-self-center | place-self: center; |
| place-self-center-safe | place-self: safe center; |
| place-self-stretch | place-self: stretch; | 

place-items
Utilities for controlling how items are justified and aligned at the same time.

| Class                         | Styles                        |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| place-items-start              | place-items: start;              |
| place-items-end                | place-items: end;                |
| place-items-end-safe           | place-items: safe end;           |
| place-items-center              | place-items: center;              |
| place-items-center-safe        | place-items: safe center;        |
| place-items-baseline           | place-items: baseline;           |
| place-items-stretch             | place-items: stretch;             |

place-content
Utilities for controlling how content is justified and aligned at the same time.

| Class                         | Styles                        |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| place-content-center          | place-content: center;          |
| place-content-center-safe     | place-content: safe center;     |
| place-content-start            | place-content: start;            |
| place-content-end               | place-content: end;               |
| place-content-end-safe         | place-content: safe end;         |
| place-content-between           | place-content: space-between;    |
| place-content-around             | place-content: space-around;      |
| place-content-evenly           | place-content: space-evenly;    |
| place-content-baseline         | place-content: baseline;         |
| place-content-stretch           | place-content: stretch;           |

order
Utilities for controlling the order of flex and grid items.

| Class                         | Styles                        |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| order-<number>              | order: <number>;              |
| order-<number>              | order: calc(<number> * -1);   |
| order-first                  | order: -9999;                    |
| order-last                    | order: 9999;                     |
| order-none                   | order: 0;                       |
| order-(<custom-property>)   | order: var(<custom-property>); |
| order-[<value>]              | order: <value>;                 |

justify-self
Utilities for controlling how an individual grid item is aligned along its inline axis.

| Class                         | Styles                        |
| -------------------------------- | -------------------------------------- |
| justify-self-auto              | justify-self: auto;              |
| justify-self-start              | justify-self: start;              |
| justify-self-center              | justify-self: center;              |
| justify-self-center-safe     | justify-self: safe center;     |
| justify-self-end               | justify-self: end;               |
| justify-self-end-safe         | justify-self: safe end;         |
| justify-self-stretch           | justify-self: stretch;           |
